So now it's time to look at what's really the last piece of the puzzle when it comes to developing for
the web.
We've looked at how we can use e-mail and see SS to style our content and then we use javascript and
Jay query to make our pages interactive and functional within the browser.
Then we looked at HP to see how we could run code on the server side.
And finally what we need is a database to allow us to store details of our users or our content or whatever
we want on our website that's going to be updated regularly and we're going to be doing this with my
Eskil Eskew L stands for server query language and there are various different types of Escal out there.
We're going to be using my askew L because it's completely free it's open source and it's extremely
widely used.
It's also available very simply on the web hosting that comes with the costs.
And also if you've installed your own Apache server so it's well worth learning.
In this video we're going to take a look at how to set up a minuscule database on Eger web hosting.
Obviously if you're using a different host or if you've installed Apache on your own machine you can
follow their instructions to set up the database.
So I'm going to be working on a complete web developer because don't come.
So if you want to set this up and follow along it's easier.
Web hosting Dockerty UK slash C.P. slash list domains that will get a list of all your domain names.
If you haven't set any up yet then go to the hosting set up section of this course and do that first
and then when we click on the domain name here that will take us to the C panel where we can do a lot
of things but specifically we can set up databases say hey we gave.
Scroll down to web tools and you can see the option inside web tools.
There is my SU Well databases and here we are where we need to do is put in.
I use the name so let's pretend we want to create a database to store our users.
So I might call this a user's database and then I'll click Create and that's it.
We've got our database up and running.
If I then scroll down you can see that it's created this database here but the database user name is
not what I put in.
This is because the user name is change depending on what server is running on.
So this one is running on C-L 29 and also to keep databases separate.
A random three character string is added on the end there.
That also increases security because your database name is harder to guess.
Also make note of the database password which will be displayed just once when you've created your database
will need that to connect to the database in the next lecture.
The password is case sensitive.
All right.
So that's set up our database.
Let's see how we can manage our database in order to add some tables and some content get taken over
to PH P my admin.
So this is a very common database interaction too.
And it's pretty good as well.
I use it all the time.
So we've got some information about our database server versions etc..
Over on the right password options and appearances in the middle of really what we want to do is click
on the database itself that we want to work with.
So I'm going to click over on the left and then because this is an empty database there are no tables
in it.
My only option is to create a table.
So the simplest way to think about a database is that it is a collection of tables and each table could
be imagined to be more or less an Excel spreadsheet with a bunch of rows and columns.
So if I want to store a bunch of uses I might want to create a table or a spreadsheet with the name
uses unlike an Excel spreadsheet.
I need to specify how many columns I want my table to have I can change this later on.
But I think I want to store an email address a password and an ID number for each of my users.
So I'm going to put in three columns that are right now I need to describe each of my columns and tell
the database what type of variable they're going to contain.
So I'm going to start off with my ID number.
Now it's a very very good idea to have an ID number in all of your tables.
So it should really be the first thing that you put in every time.
Not only does it make it easy to find a particular record but it also actually makes your database more
efficient and faster.
When it comes to finding information in it.
So we'll call it ID.
It's going to be an integer.
So just a whole number there.
I don't need to specify any length values daily to give it a default value.
I'm going to miss out those bits there but what I do want to have is I want to set this as the primary
key and then the database knows that this number is going to be a unique key that we can use to refer
to a particular row.
And then I'm going to click AI which is short for auto increment and that essentially just means it'll
add 1 to the ID each time we add a new user.
Which is a very useful feature.
So we don't need to set the ID number manually ourselves.
OK so now we've got our ID number.
We're going to have our e-mail address which I'll call e-mail and this time we don't want an integer
because it's not a number.
I'm going to use a text type there.
You can see we've got lots of different types of column similar to the types of variable that we have.
But many more we're going to look at several of those later on in this section.
But I'm just going to go for text for my email field.
Finally we're going to have password as well and that's going to be text to.
We don't need to set default values for any of these or indeed change any of these more complex options
at all we can have some comments if we want but I'm just going to leave that blank and then click Sife
and that will then create our table right here and you can see there's a number of things that we can
do with that table we can browse the data in it we can change the structure so we could add or remove
columns or change the types of certain columns etc. We can search it we can insert data into it.
We can make it empty or we can drop it or delete it completely.
So as we don't have any data yet let's insert something first of all and then we'll have a quick browse
before we go on to connecting to our database with the script in the next video.
So let's add an email address for Rob.
Rob Percival Tokarev UK.
And then I'm going to very securely use my password as a password and then we just click go and then
it runs this as well which we won't look into in that much detail right now but we'll be writing stuff
like this in just a couple of videos time you can possibly imagine what this does it says insert into.
And then there's the database name and the table name.
And then we've got the three column names and then the values for each of those names so we've got now
for I.D. because that's autoincrement So it's going to be created by itself and then we've got Roback
we're Percival the UK for the email and my password for the password.
And you can see that's been successful because we've got a tick up there.
Quite so now that we've added a row to our table let's just browse and have a look and you can see now
we've got the table itself with an item in it.
So it's got an idea of one because it's the first one could be email there and it's got the password.
So that's pretty much all we're going to look at here.
One very quick word on passwords is that you should never store your user's passwords in plain text
like I'm doing here.
This is very bad because if you get hacked and someone gets access to your database then they can see
all of your user's passwords so they would be able to access their accounts on your system.
But more significantly because people use the same password for many different accounts they might well
be able to access their PayPal account or even their Twitter account and take control over it.
So I'll show you how to properly store passwords later on in the section.
But for now we're just concentrating on how databases work.
So there we go.
Feel free to have a click around HP my admin and see what else you can do.
But essentially what we've got is a database is a set of tables each of which can be thought of as more
or less an Excel spreadsheet with columns.
In this case Id email and password and then rows with particular values in.
In this case an idea of one e-mail of Roback proposal would occur to you OK and then password of my
password then we can have as many of these as we like and we can search them we can take them.
We can do whatever we like with them.
So databases are extremely powerful.
They're absolutely critical to web development.
But of course we don't want to just work with our database in HP my admin.
We wanted to run on our Web site and to do that we need to use a server language and we're going to
do that with HP.
So we'll see how to connect to our database with HP in the next few.